---
date: 2015-03-02T00:00:00Z
title: In memory of Matt Carpenter
---

It was February four years ago that a friend and ex-colleague (in that
order) of mine committed suicide. I could say plenty about him, but for the
purpose of this blog I'll focus on just one aspect, which is work.

---

I met Matt in college where we in the same A-level computing class. We both
had an interest in Linux, networks, security, and practically anything
computing related that *wasn't* the Microsoft Access coursework that we were
*meant* to be doing.

Some time after college he got me an introduction for job at a web
development company where he was already working. I passed my driving test a
week before starting which meant that he no longer had to get the train.

Matt would call himself a developer but always had an equal interest in
systems administration. Today we'd call it DevOps™, but more than ten years
ago and in a very small company we just did what needed to be done. We
racked and de-racked colo, soldered and patched cables, configured switches
and operating systems, tuned databases, deployed software, tested failover,
etc.

He got me into using Gentoo Linux. I don't have the time or inclination to
use it anymore, but I have no regrets because it taught me the most I'd ever
learn about Linux to this day. He gave me the confidence to dive into other
peoples code to debug and fix it, including the monstrosity of a PHP
application that we ran and supported.

Much more importantly though he got me interested in version control and
writing Python code. Prior to that most of the utilities I'd written were in
Bash and they were terrible. We disagreed on the subject of Perl - I seem to
be one of the few sysadmins that has never grokked it. Python however seemed
different, elegant, accessible, and Matt was pretty evangelical about it.

My first attempts were pretty contrived. I tried to convert existing scripts
using liberal doses of `os.popen()`. Soon though, after asking him lots of
questions about how to do things and why, I was able to automate processes
like on-boarding new clients and taking backups of MySQL on NetApp storage.
I felt clumsy but empowered.

In hindsight, I owe a lot to him. Without him I'd likely have a very
different career to the one that I do today. Less successful and definitely
less fun. It's a shame that it took hindsight to fully realise this though.

---

He used to complain about our job an awful lot. Mind you, so did I. He
talked a lot about quitting and was sure that the grass was greener
elsewhere, but when he did leave it turned out not to be the case. He
crashed through two jobs that he didn't like and struggled to find anything
after. A mixture of bad luck and bad timing.

I believe he'd suffered from depression for as long as I'd known him. He
also had terrible bouts of insomnia, which only seemed to make matters
worse. It wasn't something that we really talked about - I had no idea how
to broach the subject. There were other factors too, but [burnout][] wasn't
really one of them.

[burnout]: http://burnout.io

His death took everyone by surprise. I blamed myself a lot. I should have
been a greater help, more available, less wrapped up in my own life. True to
common advice the feeling of guilt fades over time but never completely
goes. I carried his coffin at the funeral because it was the very least that
I could do. I still wish I could find any meaningful words to say to his
family.

---

One of the many *many* frustrating things is that I don't feel like I've
learnt any solid lessons from any of this. Even though several people close
to me are also prone to depression. Even though it seems to be a common
theme in this industry that I work.

I have no good advice to give besides some woolly sentiments about
attempting to be a good human being; try to talk, take time to listen,
praise people for doing good things, don't be an arsehole, and consider that
you have no idea what someone might be going through.

It seems that we should talk more openly and frequently about these topics.
That doing so would reduce the stigma associated. If we're not able to talk
about them now, then it's going to be even harder for people to talk when
they actually need help. That is of course easy for me to say though.

I started writing this post in the second week of February. While still
struggling to find the right words I learned that [Carlo Flores (@lolcatstevens)][]
had taken his life. I only knew him through Twitter, but it was clear that
he was a very good person. This has of course been affirmed by all of the
people that knew him better and have spoken about him since. The news slowed
me down at first but then later motivated me to actually finish writing
this.

[Carlo Flores (@lolcatstevens)]: https://twitter.com/lolcatstevens

You should also read these:

- [Elliot Crosby-McCullough - Depression in tech](http://elliotcm.co.uk/articles/depression.html)
- [John Willis - Karōjisatsu](http://itrevolution.com/karojisatsu/)
